1 FUNDAMENTALS OF GAS TURBINE ENGINES 
 
  
INTRODUCTION  
 
The gas turbine is an internal combustion engi ne that uses air as the working fluid.  
The engine extracts chemical energy from fuel and converts it to mechanical energy 
using the gaseous energy of the working fl uid (air) to drive the engine and propeller, 
which, in turn, propel the airplane.   
THE GAS TURBINE CYCLE 
 
The basic principle of the airplane turbi ne engine is identical to any and all engines 
that extract energy from chemical fuel.  T he basic 4 steps for any internal combustion 
engine are:  
1.  Intake of air (and possibly fuel). 2.  Compression of the air (and possibly fuel). 3.  Combustion, where fuel is injected (i f it was not drawn in  with the intake air) 
and burned to convert the stored energy. 
4.  Expansion and exhaust, where the converted energy is put to use.  
 In the case of a piston engine, such as t he engine in a car or reciprocating airplane 
engine, the intake, compression, combusti on, and exhaust steps occur in the same 
place (cylinder head) at different ti mes as the piston goes up and down.  
 In the turbine engine, however, these same f our steps occur at the same time but in 
different places.  As a result of this fundamental difference, the turbine has engine 
sections called:  
1.  The inlet section 2.  The compressor section 3.  The combustion section (the combustor) 4.  The turbine (and exhaust) section. 
 The turbine section of the gas  turbine engine has the task of producing usable output 
shaft power to drive the propelle r.  In addition, it must also provide power to drive the 
compressor and all engine accessories.  It does this by expanding the high 
temperature, pressure, and velocity gas  and converting the gaseous energy to 
mechanical energy in the form of shaft power.  A large mass of air must be supplied to the turbine in order to produce the necessary 
power.  This mass of air is supplied by the compressor, which draws the air into the engine and squeezes it to provide high-pressure  air to the turbine.  The compressor 
2 does this by converting mechanical energy fr om the turbine to gaseous energy in the 
form of pressure and temperature.  If the compressor and the turbine were 100% efficient, the compressor would supply 
all the air needed by the turbine.  At the same time, the turbine would supply the necessary power to drive the compressor.  In this case, a perpetual motion machine 
would exist.  However, frictional losses and mechanical system inefficiencies do not 
allow a perpetual motion machine to operate.   Additional energy must be added to the 
air to accommodate for these losses.  Powe r output is also desired from the engine 
(beyond simply driving the compressor); thus , even more energy must be added to the 
air to produce this excess power.  Energy addition to the system is accomplished in the combustor.  Chemical energy from fuel  as it is burned is converted to gaseous 
energy in the form of high temperatures and high velocity as the air passes through 
the combustor.  The gaseous energy is conv erted back to mechanical energy in the 
turbine, providing power to drive the compressor and the output shaft.   
SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES 
 
As air passes through a gas turbine engi ne, aerodynamic and energy requirements 
demand changes in the air’s velocity and pressu re.  During compression, a rise in the 
air pressure is required, but not an increase in its velocity.  After compression and 
combustion have heated the air, an increase in the velocity of gases is necessary in 
order for the turbine rotors to develop power .  The size and shape of the ducts through 
which the air flows affect these various c hanges.  Where a conversion from velocity to 
pressure is required, the pa ssages are divergent.  Conversely, if a conversion from 
pressure to velocity is needed, a convergent duct is used.  Before further discussion, an explanation of  convergent ducts, divergent ducts, and the 
behavior of air within these ducts should be made.  An understanding of the difference 
between static pressure (P
s), impact pressure, (P i), and total pressure (P t) is also 
needed.  The difference between static, impact, and tota l pressures is as follows.  Static 
pressure is the force per unit area exerted on the walls of a container by a stationary 
fluid.  An example is the air pressure wit hin a car tire.  Impact pressure, on the other 
hand, is the force per unit area exerted by fl uids in motion.  Impact pressure is a 
function of the velocity of the fluid.  An example of impact pressure is the pressure 
exerted on one's hand held outside a moving car’ s window.  Total pressure is the sum 
of static and impact pressures.    Figure 2-1 illustrates the methods  used to measure pressures.   Part (a) illustrates the 
measurement of static pressure .  Static pressure will not take  into account the velocity 
of the air.  Part (b) illustrates the measur ement of total pressure, which accounts for 
both static pressure and the pressure due to the moving fluid (impac t pressure).  In 
3 order to obtain impact pressure, the value of the static pressure is  subtracted from the 
value of total pressure. 
 
Figure 2-2 shows the principle of divergent  ducts, where energy is neither being added 
or taken away, but where the gaseous energy  is being converted from velocity to 
pressure and temperature.  There is a veloci ty decrease as air flows from a small inlet 
to a larger outlet.  As velocity decreases, impact pressure (P i) also decreases.  Since 
no energy is added or subt racted from the system, total pressure (P t) for the air 
remains constant and static pressure (P s) increases.  One way of viewing this is that 
the impact pressure is convert ed to static pressure; thus, a static pressure rise is seen 
as air flows through a divergent duct and is co mpressed.  A temperature rise is also 
noticed since compression is a heating process. 
 
The convergent duct operates exactly in reve rse of the divergent  duct.  Figure 2-3 
shows the principle of conv ergent ducts, where energy is neither being added or taken 
away, but where the gaseous energy is  being converted from pressure and 
temperature to velocity.  There is a velocity increase as air flows from a large inlet to a 
smaller outlet.  As velocity increases, im pact pressure also increases.  Since no 
energy is added or subtracted from the system , total pressure remains constant and 
static pressure decreases.  One way of vie wing this is that the static pressure is 
converted to impact pressure; thus, a static pressure decrease is seen as air flows 
through a convergent duct and goes through expansion.  A temperature drop is 
associated with any expansion process.  

4 NOTE: Even though the static and impact pr essures are changing as fluids flow 
through either convergent or divergent ducts, the total pressure does not change.  This 
is true if fluid friction is neglected and energy is not added or  taken away from the fluid 
flow.  In actuality, there will be a slight dec rease in total pressure because of fluid 
frictional losses.  
 
 
PERFORMANCE AND EFFICIENCY 
 
The type of operation for which the engi ne is designed dictates the performance 
requirement of a gas turbine engine.  The performance requirement is mainly 
determined by the amount of s haft horsepower (s.h.p.) the engine develops for a given 
set of conditions.  The majority of airc raft gas turbine engines are rated at standard 
day conditions of 59 F and 29.92 inches Hg.  This prov ides a baseline to which gas 
turbine engines of all types can be compared.  The need for high efficiency in the engine bec omes more important as fuels become 
more costly.  Engine efficiency is primarily  defined by the specif ic fuel consumption 
(s.f.c.) of the engine at a given set of conditions.  Many factors affect both the efficiency and the performance of the engine.  The mass 
flow rate of air through the engine will dict ate engine performance.  Any restrictions 
acting against the smooth flow of air through the engine will limit the engine's 
performance.  The pressure ratio of  the compressor, the engine operating 
temperatures (turbine inlet temperature), and the individual component efficiencies will 
also influence both the performance and the effi ciency of the overall engine.  All these 
factors are considered during the design of the engine.  An  optimum pressure ratio, 
turbine inlet temperature, and air mass flow  rate are selected to obtain the required 
performance in the most efficient manner.  In addition, individual engine components 
are designed to minimize flow losses to maximize component efficiencies. 

5 The following graphic shows the typical temper ature and pressure rise through the gas 
flow path. 
 
 
ENGINE SECTIONS 
 Inlet 
 
The air inlet duct must provide clean and unrestr icted airflow to the engine.  Clean and 
undisturbed inlet airflow ext ends engine life by preventi ng erosion, corrosion, and 
foreign object damage (FOD).  Consideration of atmospheric conditions such  as dust, salt, industrial pollution, foreign 
objects (birds, nuts and bolts), and temper ature (icing conditions) must be made when 
designing the inlet system.  Fairings shoul d be installed between the engine air inlet 
housing and the inlet duct to ensure minimum ai rflow losses to the engine at all airflow 
conditions.   The inlet duct assembly is usually desi gned and produced as a sepa rate system rather 
than as part of the design and production of the engine. 
 
Compressor 
 
The compressor is responsible for providing the turbine with all t he air it needs in an 
efficient manner.  In addition, it must supply this air at high static pressures.  The 
example of a large turboprop axial flow compressor will be used.  The compressor is 
Engine Temperature and Pressure Flow  
6 assumed to contain fourteen stages of rotor blades and stator vanes.  The overall 
pressure ratio (pressure at the back of t he compressor compared to pressure at the 
front of the compressor) is approximately 9. 5:1.  At 100% (>13, 000) RPM, the engine 
compresses approximately 433 cubic feet of  air per second.  At standard day air 
conditions, this equals approximately 33 pounds of air per second.  The compressor 
also raises the temperat ure of the air by about 550 F as the air is compressed and 
moved rearward.  The power required to driv e a compressor of this size at maximum 
rated power is approximately 7000 horsepower.  In an axial flow compressor, each stage incr ementally boosts the pressure from the 
previous stage.  A single st age of compression consists of a set of rotor blades 
attached to a rotating disk, followed by stator  vanes attached to a stationary ring.  The 
flow area between the compressor blades is slightly divergent.  Flow area between 
compressor vanes is also divergen t, but more so than for the blades. 
 In general terms, the compressor rotor bl ades convert mechanical energy into 
gaseous energy.  This energy conversion greatly increases total pressure (P
t).  Most of 
the increase is in the form of velocity (P i), with a small increase in static pressure (P s) 
due to the divergence of the blade flow paths.  The stator vanes slow the ai r by means of their divergent  duct shape, converting 'the 
accelerated velocity (P
i) to higher static pressure (P s).  The vanes are positioned at an 
angle such that the exiting air is directed into  the rotor blades of t he next stage at the 
most efficient angle.  This process is repeat ed fourteen times as the air flows from the 
first stage through the fourteenth stage.  Figure 2-4 shows one stage of the 
compressor and a graph of the pressure char acteristics as the air flows through the 
stage.  In addition to the fourteen stages of blades and vanes, the compressor also incorporates the inlet guide vanes and the outlet guide vanes.  These vanes, located 
at the inlet and the outlet of the compresso r, are neither diver gent nor convergent.  
The inlet guide vanes direct air to the fi rst stage compressor blades at the "best" 
angle.  The outlet guide vanes "straighten" the air to provide the combustor with the 
proper airflow direction.  

7 The efficiency of a compressor is primar ily determined by the smoothness of the 
airflow.  During design, every effort is made to keep the air flowing smoothly through 
the compressor to minimize airflow losses due to friction and turbulence.  This task is a 
difficult one, since the air is forced to fl ow into ever-higher pressure zones.  
 Air has the natural tendency to flow toward low-pressure zones.  If air were allowed to 
flow "backward" into the lower pressure zones, the efficiency of the compressor would 
decrease tremendously as the energy used to increase the pressure of the air was 
wasted.  To prevent this from occurring, seals are incorporated  at the base of each 
row of vanes to prevent air leakage.  In addition, the tip clearances of the rotating 
blades are also kept at a minimum by the use of coating on the inner surface of the 
compressor case.  All components used in the fl ow path of the compressor are shaped in the form of 
airfoils to maintain the smoothest airflow possibl e.  Just as is the case for the wings of 
an airplane, the angle at which the air flow s across the airfoils is critical to 
performance.  The blades and vanes of the compressor are positi oned at the optimum 
angles to achieve the most efficient airflo w at the compressor’s maximum rated speed. 
 Any deviation from the maximum rated s peed changes the characteristics of the 
airflow within the compressor.  The blades  and vanes are no longer positioned at their 
optimum angles.  Many engines use bleed valv es to unload the force of excess air in 
the compressor when it operates at less than optimum speed.  The example engine 
incorporates four bleed valves  at each of the fifth and t enth compressor stages.  They 
are open until 13,000 RPM (~94% maximum) is  reached, and allow some of the 
compressed air to flow out to the atmosphere.  This results in higher air velocities over 
the blade and vane airfoils, improving the airfo il angles.  The potential for airfoil stalling 
is reduced, and compressor acceleration can be accomplished without surge.  
Diffuser  
 
Air leaves the compressor through exit guide vanes, which convert the radial 
component of the air flow out of the compre ssor to straight-line flow.  The air then 
enters the diffuser section of the engine, whic h is a very divergent  duct.  The primary 
function of the diffuser structure is aerody namic.  The divergent duct shape converts 
most of the air’s velocity (P
i) into static pressure (P S).  As a result, the highest static 
pressure and lowest velocity in the entire engine is at t he point of diffuser discharge 
and combustor inlet.  Other aerodynamic design considerations that  are important in 
the diffuser section arise from the need for a short flow path, unifo rm flow distribution, 
and low drag loss.  In addition to critical aerodynamic f unctions, the diffuser also provides: 
 Engine structural support, including engine mounting to the nacelle 
 Support for the rear compressor bearings and seals 
8  Bleed air ports, which provide pressurized air for: 
 airframe "customer" requirem ents (air conditioning, etc.) 
 engine inlet anti-icing 
 control of acceleration bleed air valves 
 Pressure and scavenge oil passages for t he rear compressor and front turbine 
bearings. 
 Mounting for the fuel nozzles. 
 
Combustor 
 
Once the air flows through the diffuser, it enters the combustion section, also called 
the combustor.  The combustion section has the difficult task of controlling the burning 
of large amounts of fuel and ai r.  It must release the heat in a manner that the air is 
expanded and accelerated to give a smooth and stable stream of uniformly-heated gas 
at all starting and operating conditions.  Th is task must be accomplished with minimum 
pressure loss and maximum heat release.  In addition, the combustion liners must 
position and control the fire to prevent  flame contact with any metal parts. 
 The engine in this example uses a can-annul ar combustion section.  Six combustion 
liners (cans) are positioned within an annulus  created by inner and outer combustion 
cases.  Combustion takes place in the fo rward end or primary zone of the cans.  
Primary air (amounting to about one fourth of t he total engine’s total airflow) is used to 
support the combustion process.  The rema ining air, referred to as secondary or 
dilution air, is admitted into the liners in a controlled manner.  The secondary air 
controls the flame pattern, cools the liner walls, dilutes the temperature of the core 
gasses, and provides mass.  This cooling air is critical, as the flame temperature is 
above 1930 C (3500'F), which is higher than the meta ls in the engine can endure.  It is 
important that the f uel nozzles and combustion liners control the burning and mixing of 
fuel and air under all conditions to avoid exce ss temperatures reaching the turbine or 
combustion cases.  Maximum combustion se ction outlet temperature (turbine inlet 
temperature) in this engine is about 1070 C (>1950 F). 
 The rear third of the combustion liners is t he transition section.  The transition section 
has a very convergent duct shape, which begins accelerating the gas stream and 
reducing the static pressure in preparati on for entrance to the turbine section. 
 
Turbine 
 
This example engine has a four-stage turbi ne.  The turbine converts the gaseous 
energy of the air/burned fuel mi xture out of the combustor into mechanical energy to 
drive the compressor, driven accessories, and,  through a reduction gear, the propeller.  
The turbine converts gaseous energy into  mechanical energy by expanding the hot, 
high-pressure gases to a lower temperature and pressure.  Each stage of the turbine consists of a ro w of stationary vanes followed by a row of 
rotating blades.  This is the reverse of the or der in the compressor.  In the compressor, 
9 energy is added to the gas by the rotor blades , then converted to static pressure by 
the stator vanes.  In the turbine, the st ator vanes increase gas velocity, and then the 
rotor blades extract energy.  The vanes and blades are airfoils  that provide for a smooth flow of the gases.  As the 
airstream enters the turbine se ction from the combustion se ction, it is accelerated 
through the first stage stator vanes.  The stator vanes (also called nozzles) form 
convergent ducts that conv ert the gaseous heat and pressure energy into higher 
velocity gas flow (P
i).  In addition to accelerating the gas, the vanes "turn" the flow to 
direct it into the rotor blades at the optimum angle.  As the mass of the high velocity gas fl ows across the turbine blades, the gaseous 
energy is converted to mechanical energy.  Ve locity, temperature, and pressure of the 
gas are sacrificed in order to  rotate the turbine to generate shaft power.  Figure 2-5 
represents one stage of the turb ine and the characteristics of  the gases as it flows 
through the stage.  The efficiency of the turbine is determined by how well it extracts mechanical energy from the hot, high-velocity gasses.  Since ai r flows from a high-pre ssure zone to a low-
pressure zone, this task is accomplished fair ly easily.  The use of properly positioned 
airfoils allows a smooth flow and expansion of gases through the blades and vanes of 
the turbine.  All the air must flow across the airfoils to ac hieve maximum efficiency in the turbine.  In 
order to ensure this, seals are used at the base of the vanes to minimize gas flow 
around the vanes instead of thr ough the intended gas path.  In  addition, the first three 
stages of the turbine blades have tip shrouds  to minimize gas flow around the blade 
tips.  
 
Exhaust  
 
After the gas has passed through the turbi ne, it is discharged through the exhaust.  
Though most of the gaseous energy is convert ed to mechanical energy by the turbine, 
a significant amount of pow er remains in the exhaust gas.  This gas energy is 
accelerated through the convergent duct shape of  the exhaust to make it more useful 

10 as jet thrust - the principle of equal and oppos ite reaction means that the force of the 
exhausted air drives the airplane forward.   
EFFECTS OF TURBINE TEMPERATURE 
 
The materials used in the turbine section of the engine limit the maximum temperature 
at which a gas turbine engine can operate.  The first metal the hot gases from the 
combustion section strike is the turbine inle t.  The temperature of  the gas stream is 
carefully monitored to ensure that  overtemperature does not occur. 
 
 
 
Sample Engine Pressure, Temperature, and Velocity   
 
 
Compromises are made in turbine design to  achieve the optimum balance of power, 
efficiency, cost,  engine life, and other factors.  As an example, our sample engine can 
operate at a higher turbine inlet temperat ure than previous m odels due to improved 
materials and design.  The higher temper ature allows for increased power and 
improved efficiency while adding higher cost for the direct cooling of the first turbine 
stage airfoils and other components. 

11  
 
EFFECTS OF ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 
 
The performance of the gas turbine engi ne is dependent on the ma ss of air entering 
the engine.  At a constant s peed, the compressor pumps a constant volume of air into 
the engine with no regard for air mass or density.  If the density of the air decreases, 
the same volume of air will contain less mass,  so less power is produced.  If air density 
increases, power output also increases as the air mass flow increases for the same 
volume of air.  Atmospheric conditions affect the performanc e of the engine since the density of the 
air will be different under different  conditions.  On a cold day, the air density is high, so 
the mass of the air entering the compresso r is increased.  As a result, higher 
horsepower is produced.  In contrast, on a hot  day, or at high alti tude, air density is 
decreased, resulting in a decrease of output shaft power. 
 
 
COMPRESSOR STALL/SURGE 
 
Background information 
 
Compressor stall or surge is not peculiar to  any one particular brand or type of engine.  
It may occur on any turbine engine if condi tions are right.  Stall has been encountered 
on two-stage or turbo-superc harged piston engines, so there is no need to look upon 
stall as some mysterious product of gas turbine engines.  Any number of mechanical defects, such as  bad spark plugs, lean  carburetion, poor 
timing, or sticking valves, can result in reci procating engines backfirin g.  Similarly, for 
gas turbine engines, maintenance or flight  conditions can influence the compressor 
stall or surge appreciably.  The condition and operation of the bleed valve and fuel 
system components are of vital importance in maintaining surge-free operation. 
 Why are engines at risk of surge?  As engines are designed to meet demands for 
higher power or lower specific fuel c onsumption, the engines must accommodate: 
 
 Increased mass airflow. 
 Increased pressure (compression) ratio. 
 Increased maximum allowable turbine inlet and outlet temperatures. 
 Improved efficiency of the compressor and turbine sections. 
 Quick engine starts and rapid accelerations are also desirable.  To provide higher 
power with low specific f uel consumption and acceptabl e starting and acceleration 
characteristics, it is necessary to operate as close to the surge region as possible. 
 
12 To prevent compressor stall or surge, fuel  flow must be proper ly metered during the 
start and acceleration cycle of any gas tu rbine engine.  To accomplish this, the 
example engine incorporates 5th and 10th stage acceleration bleed valves. 
 In general, there are fewer surge problems on centrifugal compressors than on axial 
flow compressors.  There are several reasons  for the difference; the primary reason is 
that centrifugal flow compressors operate at somewhat lower pressure ratios than axial 
flow compressors.  
Explanation of stall/surge 
 
A surge from a turbine engine is the result of instability of the engine's operating cycle.  
As discussed earlier, the oper ating cycle of the turbine engine consists of intake, 
compression, combustion, and exhaust, which o ccur simultaneously in different places 
in the engine.  The part of t he cycle susceptible to instability is the compression phase.  
Compressor surge may be caused by engine det erioration, it may be the result of 
ingestion of birds or ice, or it may be the final sound from a “severe engine damage” 
type of failure.  In a turbine engine, compression is acco mplished aerodynamically as the air passes 
through the stages of the compressor, rather than by confinement, as  is the case in a 
piston engine.  The air flowing over the compresso r airfoils can stall just as the air over 
the wing of an airplane can.  When this airf oil stall occurs, the passage of air through 
the compressor becomes unstable and the compressor can no longer compress the incoming air.  The high-pressure air behind t he stall further back in the engine escapes 
forward through the compressor and out the inlet.   This escape is sudden, rapid and often quite  audible as a loud bang.  Engine surge 
can be accompanied by visible flames forw ard out the inlet and rearward out the 
tailpipe.  Instruments may show high EG T and EPR or rotor speed changes; but, in 
many stalls, the event is over so quickly that the instruments do not have time to 
respond.  Once the air from within the engine escapes , the reason (reasons) for the instability 
may self-correct and the compression process may re-establish itself.  A single surge 
and recovery will occur quite rapidly, usually within fractions of a second.  Depending 
on the reason for the cause of the compre ssor instability, an engine might experience: 
 
1.  A single self-recovering surge 2.  Multiple surges prior to self-recovery 3.  Multiple surges requiring pilot action in order to recover 4.  A non-recoverable surge. 
  For complete, detailed procedures, flight crew s must follow the appropriate checklists 
and emergency procedures detailed in their specific Airplane Flight Manual.  In 
general, however, during a single self-recoveri ng surge, the cockpit engine indications 
13 may fluctuate slightly and brie fly.  The flight crew may not notice the fluctuation.  
(Some of the more recent engines may even have fuel-flow logic that helps the engine 
self-recover from a surge without crew inte rvention.  The stall may go completely 
unnoticed, or it may be annunciated to the crew – for information only – via EICAS 
messages.)  Alternatively, the engine may su rge two or three times before full self-
recovery.  When this happens, there is likel y to be cockpit engine instrumentation 
shifts of sufficient magnit ude and duration to be noticed by the flight crew.  If the 
engine does not recover automatically from the surge, it may surge continually until the 
pilot takes action to stop the process.  The desired pilot action is to retard the power 
lever until the engine recovers.  The flight  crew should then SLOWLY re-advance the 
power lever.  Occasionally, an engine may su rge only once but still not self-recover. 
 The actual cause for the compressor surge is  often complex and may or may not result 
from severe engine damage.  Rarely does a single compressor surge CAUSE severe engine damage, but sustained surg ing will eventually over-heat  the turbine, as too 
much fuel is being provided for the volume of air that is reaching the combustor.  Compressor blades may also be damaged and fa il as a result of  repeated violent 
surges; this will rapidly result in an engine which cannot run at any power setting.  
